packages/elements/README.md, before:

# Elements

> Part of the Lucid Client suite

A lightweight, reactive UI library that bridges HTML and JavaScript through attributes. Elements brings reactive state and dynamic behaviors to your markup while maintaining simplicity - all powered by [SolidJS](https://www.solidjs.com/).

## Why Use Elements?

Elements is the perfect choice when you need just enough interactivity without the overhead of a full framework. It excels at common UI tasks like class toggling, event handling, and DOM manipulation while keeping your codebase lean. Whether you're building a small site or medium-sized application, Elements provides the essential reactive features you need with a minimal JavaScript footprint.

- Attributes Stay Synced: All `data-state--` attributes are kept in sync with their signals state, meaning you cas use them in CSS with attribute selectors.
- Default State: As state is defined via an attribute, you can use it in CSS attribute selectors before the library is even initialised meaning no layout shifts and flashes of content.
- No Functions In Markup: This may sound like a missing feature, especially compared to a library like AlpineJS. Though we'd argue this is an anti-pattern as you loose type checking, LSP support, being able to compile and bundle the JS and the ability to import modules. It also doesnt work with the `unsafe-eval` CSP policy.
- Two Way Data Binding: This means you can update the state attributes independently of the library and Elements will keep in sync.
- HTML Spec Compliant: We are HTML spec compliant through the use of data- attributes. However we offer the ability to fully customise the attributes used, so if you dont like the syntax, you can change it to something more suited to your needs.
- SolidJS Reactivity: We make use of SolidJS for reactivity, meaning the library remains performant and light weight.

## Installation

To install the Lucid Elements library, run the following command:

```bash
npm install @lucidclient/elements
```

## Elements Usage

Import `Elements`, register any required handlers and store modules and call the `start` function.

```typescript
import Elements, { registerHandler } from "@lucidclient/elements";
import { EventHandlers, IntersectionHandlers, DOMHandlers } from "@lucidclient/elements/handlers";

registerHandler(EventHandlers);
registerHandler(IntersectionHandlers);
registerHandler(DOMHandlers);

Elements.start();
```

> Elements is built to be tree-shakeable, so you can import only the handlers you need.

### HTML Markup

```html
<header
    data-element="nav"
    data-state--open="false"
    class="h-10 bg-black text-white"
>
    <div class="flex justify-between items-center">
        <h1>Elements</h1>
        <button
            data-handler--event.click="nav:toggle"
            data-bind--aria-expanded="nav:open"
            data-bind--aria-label="nav:ariaLabel"
            aria-controls="main-nav"
        >
            <span data-ref="nav:buttonLabel"> Open Navigation </span>
        </button>
    </div>
    <nav
        id="main-nav"
        data-bind--aria-hidden="nav:closed"
        class="[&[aria-hidden='false']]:translate-x-0 fixed inset-0 top-10 bg-gray-800 z-50 transition-transform duration-200 translate-x-full p-2.5"
        aria-label="Main navigation"
        aria-hidden="true"
    >
        <a href="/">Home</a>
        <a href="/about">About</a>
    </nav>
</header>
```

### Store Modules

Store modules allow you to extend the state and define actions for your element stores. In Elements all of your logic should exist within the store module, as opposed to defining functions in HTML markup. This has a few added benefits such as having LSP support, being able to be compiled and bundled, and being able to import modules etc.

```typescript
import { storeModule, createSignal } from "@lucidclient/elements";

type NavStoreState = {
    open: boolean;
    ariaLabel: string;
}

type NavStoreActions = {
    toggle: (e: Event) => void;
    closed: () => boolean;
}

storeModule<NavStoreState, NavStoreActions>("nav", (store) => ({
    state: {
        ariaLabel: createSignal("Open Navigation"),
    },
    actions: {
        toggle: () => {
            const [getOpen, setOpen] = store.state.open;
            const [_, setAriaLabel] = store.state.ariaLabel;
            const buttonElement = store.refs.get("buttonLabel");

            if (getOpen()) {
                setAriaLabel("Open Navigation");
                if (buttonElement instanceof HTMLElement)
                    buttonElement.innerText = "Open Navigation";
            } else {
                setAriaLabel("Close Navigation");
                if (buttonElement instanceof HTMLElement)
                    buttonElement.innerText = "Close Navigation";
            }

            setOpen((prev) => !prev);
        },
        closed: () => {
            const [getOpen] = store.state.open;
            return !getOpen(); 
        }
    },
}));
```

> All store modules need to be defined before running the `Elements.start()` function.

## Attributes

There are 4 main types of attributes Elements currently registers, these allow you to register state, binds, handlers and refs.

### Store `data-element`

To denote an element as a store, use the `data-element` attribute. This requires a value to be set against it, which is used to scope state and handler actions as well as to reference a store module if you choose to register one.

Stores can be nested, so you can have a parent element with a store and a child element with a store. This then allows children to reference the parent store via the scoped state.

```html
<header
    data-element="nav"
    data-state--open="false"
>
    <div
        data-element="content"
        data-state--label="Hello World"
        data-bind--aria-expanded="nav:open"
    >
        <button data-handler--dom.text="content:label"></button>
    </div>
</header>
```

### State `data-state--`

Any element that has a store registered against with via the `data-element` attribute can also register state via the `data-state--` attribute. You can define these using the `data-state--{statekey}="{value}"` attribute, where the `statekey` is the name of the signal and the value is the default value. These support a few different data types including `string`, `number`, `boolean`, `object` and `array`.

These are reactive, meaning on change they will:

1. Update the state attribtue on the element where it was registered.
2. Update any bind attributes that reference them.
3. Fire any side effects that you register within store modules via the `createEffect` function.

Unlike the `string`, `number` and `boolean` state data types, `array` and `object` state types do not have their state attributes updated when they're mutated, however they do still update attribute bindings, and if you update the state attribute programmatically, that state will be still be kept in sync.

These are two way binded, meaning if the attribute value is changed outside of the Elements library, Elements will keep the states signal in sync still.

> Please keep in mind that the browser will normalise the attribute name to lowercase, so `data-state--isDisabled` is turned into `data-state--isdisabled`. This lowercase attribute name is whats used as the state key and so when referencing it in attribute bindings, you must use the lowercase version.

### Bind `data-bind--`

This syntax indicates an attribute binding and takes the name of the state or action you want to bind to the attribute. Please note that the value must always be lowercase.

For example, if you had an attribute binding of `data-bind--disabled="example:state"`, whenever the state signal changes on the example store, the attribute of `disabled` will be updated to reflect that new value. You can also bind to actions, so if you had an action `example:action` you could bind to it with `data-bind--disabled="example:action"` which use the returned value as the attribute value.

For `array` and `object` state types you can reference values and indexes using dot and bracket notation respectively. Ie. `data-bind--data-object="example:object.hello"` and `data-bind--data-array="example:array[0]"`.

Note you cannot do any conditional logic in binds, so something like `data-bind--disabled="example:boolean1 != example:boolean2"` will not work. This is because for the time being we are not able to make use of `eval` or function constructors to evaluate the expression due to the `unsafe-eval` CSP policy. If you want to do something like this, you can set the value to that of a action on your store module and have the action return the condition instead.

### Handler `data-handler--`

All handlers are prefixed with `data-handler--` and are registered through plugins. By default Elements doesnt register any handlers, but includes a few first-party built-in plugins for event handling, intersection, basic DOM manipulation and potentially more down the line.

The naming is `data-handler--namesapce.specifier="action"`.

These call user defined actions that are registered via store modules. Much like the `bind` attribute, you cannot do any conditional logic in handlers, so something like `data-handler--dom.text="example:open ? 'Open' : 'Close'"` will not work. This may change in the future, but for now we've decided to not support this due to the `unsafe-eval` CSP policy.

### Refs `data-ref="name"`

Refs are used to select elements and store them so you can easily access them from within you store modules. These are stored as a Map against the store, with the key being the attribute value and the value being the element of type Element or ELement[].

Any attributes that are suffixed with `[]` will be stored as an array of elements with the same name.

## TODO:

- [x] Add object and array state support.
- [x] For object/array state types, dont bother update the state attributes at all. The only reason these are kept in sync with state is for CSS attribute selector support, but I dont suspect devs even using these data types for this, it makes sense that should be reserved for booleans, numbers and strings only.
- [x] Parse state attribute values, convert to string, number, boolean, etc.
- [x] Stringify state values when updating attribute bindings.
- [x] Disable state registration on children.
- [x] Optimise the updateBind function - may need attribute map bindings type updated.
- [x] Export SolidJS createSignal, createEffect and createMemo from the library.
- [x] Made storeModule and registerHandler exports instead of the default import for better tree shaking.
- [x] Go through project and address all TODOs.
- [x] Add `data-ref="name"` support. If suffixed with a `[]`, push the element to an array.
- [x] Add interface to use for the store module instead of passing the store in.
- [x] Add scoping support to attribute values? So elements store can define a scope via `data-scope="name"` and then bind, refs and handles can prefix values with `scopename:`. A bind for example, would look like `data-bind--disabled="scopename:statekey"`.
- [x] Constant attributes prefixes need to be configurable via the Elements.start method. Smae with seperators config.
- [x] Handles shouldnt be grabbed in the context of a store and instead globally. Based on state and scope used the store used should be determined.
- [x] Implement solution for plugins and registering handlers.
- [x] Change scoping to use `data-element="name"` instead of `data-scope="name"` to reduce boilerplate and force scoping. Is more explicit and easier to understand whats going on.
- [-] Create Events handler plugin. Needs destroy method updating.
- [] Instead of supporting !state for booleans, allow attribute bindings to set actions as well allowing you to do any conditionals you need within them.
- [] Create Intersection handler plugin.
- [] Create DOM handler plugin.
- [] Create Focus Trap handler plugin.
- [] Go through lib and add debug logs where appropriate.
- [] Update entire readme to be better structured and more in-depth.
- [] Add method for re-creating the stores - would be needed for Astro's full site view transitions.
- [] Create some examples of how to use the library and make use of the createSignal, createEffect and createMemo functions.

Commit message:

Added support for actions in data-bind attributes, these are reactive and so any changes to the signals that the action calls will update the bind attribute value with the action response

packages/elements/README.md, after:

# Elements

> Part of the Lucid Client suite

A lightweight, reactive UI library that bridges HTML and JavaScript through attributes. Elements brings reactive state and dynamic behaviors to your markup while maintaining simplicity - all powered by [SolidJS](https://www.solidjs.com/).

## Why Use Elements?

Elements is the perfect choice when you need just enough interactivity without the overhead of a full framework. It excels at common UI tasks like class toggling, event handling, and DOM manipulation while keeping your codebase lean. Whether you're building a small site or medium-sized application, Elements provides the essential reactive features you need with a minimal JavaScript footprint.

- Attributes Stay Synced: All `data-state--` attributes are kept in sync with their signals state, meaning you cas use them in CSS with attribute selectors.
- Default State: As state is defined via an attribute, you can use it in CSS attribute selectors before the library is even initialised meaning no layout shifts and flashes of content.
- No Functions In Markup: This may sound like a missing feature, especially compared to a library like AlpineJS. Though we'd argue this is an anti-pattern as you loose type checking, LSP support, being able to compile and bundle the JS and the ability to import modules. It also doesnt work with the `unsafe-eval` CSP policy.
- Two Way Data Binding: This means you can update the state attributes independently of the library and Elements will keep in sync.
- HTML Spec Compliant: We are HTML spec compliant through the use of data- attributes. However we offer the ability to fully customise the attributes used, so if you dont like the syntax, you can change it to something more suited to your needs.
- SolidJS Reactivity: We make use of SolidJS for reactivity, meaning the library remains performant and light weight.

## Installation

To install the Lucid Elements library, run the following command:

```bash
npm install @lucidclient/elements
```

## Elements Usage

Import `Elements`, register any required handlers and store modules and call the `start` function.

```typescript
import Elements, { registerHandler } from "@lucidclient/elements";
import { EventHandlers, IntersectionHandlers, DOMHandlers } from "@lucidclient/elements/handlers";

registerHandler(EventHandlers);
registerHandler(IntersectionHandlers);
registerHandler(DOMHandlers);

Elements.start();
```

> Elements is built to be tree-shakeable, so you can import only the handlers you need.

### HTML Markup

```html
<header
    data-element="nav"
    data-state--open="false"
    class="h-10 bg-black text-white"
>
    <div class="flex justify-between items-center">
        <h1>Elements</h1>
        <button
            data-handler--event.click="nav:toggle"
            data-bind--aria-expanded="nav:open"
            data-bind--aria-label="nav:ariaLabel"
            aria-controls="main-nav"
        >
            <span data-ref="nav:buttonLabel"> Open Navigation </span>
        </button>
    </div>
    <nav
        id="main-nav"
        data-bind--aria-hidden="nav:@closed"
        class="[&[aria-hidden='false']]:translate-x-0 fixed inset-0 top-10 bg-gray-800 z-50 transition-transform duration-200 translate-x-full p-2.5"
        aria-label="Main navigation"
        aria-hidden="true"
    >
        <a href="/">Home</a>
        <a href="/about">About</a>
    </nav>
</header>
```

### Store Modules

Store modules allow you to extend the state and define actions for your element stores. In Elements all of your logic should exist within the store module, as opposed to defining functions in HTML markup. This has a few added benefits such as having LSP support, being able to be compiled and bundled, and being able to import modules etc.

```typescript
import { storeModule, createSignal } from "@lucidclient/elements";

type NavStoreState = {
    open: boolean;
    ariaLabel: string;
}

type NavStoreActions = {
    toggle: (e: Event) => void;
    closed: () => boolean;
}

storeModule<NavStoreState, NavStoreActions>("nav", (store) => ({
    state: {
        ariaLabel: createSignal("Open Navigation"),
    },
    actions: {
        toggle: () => {
            const [getOpen, setOpen] = store.state.open;
            const [_, setAriaLabel] = store.state.ariaLabel;
            const buttonElement = store.refs.get("buttonLabel");

            if (getOpen()) {
                setAriaLabel("Open Navigation");
                if (buttonElement instanceof HTMLElement)
                    buttonElement.innerText = "Open Navigation";
            } else {
                setAriaLabel("Close Navigation");
                if (buttonElement instanceof HTMLElement)
                    buttonElement.innerText = "Close Navigation";
            }

            setOpen((prev) => !prev);
        },
        closed: () => {
            const [getOpen] = store.state.open;
            return !getOpen(); 
        }
    },
}));
```

> All store modules need to be defined before running the `Elements.start()` function.

## Attributes

There are 4 main types of attributes Elements currently registers, these allow you to register state, binds, handlers and refs.

### Store `data-element`

To denote an element as a store, use the `data-element` attribute. This requires a value to be set against it, which is used to scope state and handler actions as well as to reference a store module if you choose to register one.

Stores can be nested, so you can have a parent element with a store and a child element with a store. This then allows children to reference the parent store via the scoped state.

```html
<header
    data-element="nav"
    data-state--open="false"
>
    <div
        data-element="content"
        data-state--label="Hello World"
        data-bind--aria-expanded="nav:open"
    >
        <button data-handler--dom.text="content:label"></button>
    </div>
</header>
```

### State `data-state--`

Any element that has a store registered against with via the `data-element` attribute can also register state via the `data-state--` attribute. You can define these using the `data-state--{statekey}="{value}"` attribute, where the `statekey` is the name of the signal and the value is the default value. These support a few different data types including `string`, `number`, `boolean`, `object` and `array`.

These are reactive, meaning on change they will:

1. Update the state attribtue on the element where it was registered.
2. Update any bind attributes that reference them.
3. Fire any side effects that you register within store modules via the `createEffect` function.

Unlike the `string`, `number` and `boolean` state data types, `array` and `object` state types do not have their state attributes updated when they're mutated, however they do still update attribute bindings, and if you update the state attribute programmatically, that state will be still be kept in sync.

These are two way binded, meaning if the attribute value is changed outside of the Elements library, Elements will keep the states signal in sync still.

> Please keep in mind that the browser will normalise the attribute name to lowercase, so `data-state--isDisabled` is turned into `data-state--isdisabled`. This lowercase attribute name is whats used as the state key and so when referencing it in attribute bindings, you must use the lowercase version.

### Bind `data-bind--`

This syntax indicates an attribute binding and takes the name of the state or action you want to bind to the attribute. When the state is mutated, the attribute will be updated to reflect the new value.

For example, if you had an attribute binding of `data-bind--disabled="example:state"`, whenever the state signal changes on the example store, the attribute of `disabled` will be updated to reflect that new value. You can also bind to actions, so if you had an action called `isDisabled` in your store module, you could bind to it with `data-bind--disabled="example:@isDisabled"` which use the returned value as the attribute value.

For `array` and `object` state types you can reference values and indexes using dot and bracket notation respectively. Ie. `data-bind--data-object="example:object.hello"` and `data-bind--data-array="example:array[0]"`.

Note you cannot do any conditional logic in binds, so something like `data-bind--disabled="example:boolean1 != example:boolean2"` will not work. This is because for the time being we are not able to make use of `eval` or function constructors to evaluate the expression due to the `unsafe-eval` CSP policy. If you want to do something like this, you can set the value to that of a action on your store module and have the action return the condition instead.

### Handler `data-handler--`

All handlers are prefixed with `data-handler--` and are registered through plugins. By default Elements doesnt register any handlers, but includes a few first-party built-in plugins for event handling, intersection, basic DOM manipulation and potentially more down the line.

The naming is `data-handler--namesapce.specifier="action"`.

These call user defined actions that are registered via store modules. Much like the `bind` attribute, you cannot do any conditional logic in handlers, so something like `data-handler--dom.text="example:open ? 'Open' : 'Close'"` will not work. This may change in the future, but for now we've decided to not support this due to the `unsafe-eval` CSP policy.

### Refs `data-ref="name"`

Refs are used to select elements and store them so you can easily access them from within you store modules. These are stored as a Map against the store, with the key being the attribute value and the value being the element of type Element or ELement[].

Any attributes that are suffixed with `[]` will be stored as an array of elements with the same name.

## TODO:

- [x] Add object and array state support.
- [x] For object/array state types, dont bother update the state attributes at all. The only reason these are kept in sync with state is for CSS attribute selector support, but I dont suspect devs even using these data types for this, it makes sense that should be reserved for booleans, numbers and strings only.
- [x] Parse state attribute values, convert to string, number, boolean, etc.
- [x] Stringify state values when updating attribute bindings.
- [x] Disable state registration on children.
- [x] Optimise the updateBind function - may need attribute map bindings type updated.
- [x] Export SolidJS createSignal, createEffect and createMemo from the library.
- [x] Made storeModule and registerHandler exports instead of the default import for better tree shaking.
- [x] Go through project and address all TODOs.
- [x] Add `data-ref="name"` support. If suffixed with a `[]`, push the element to an array.
- [x] Add interface to use for the store module instead of passing the store in.
- [x] Add scoping support to attribute values? So elements store can define a scope via `data-scope="name"` and then bind, refs and handles can prefix values with `scopename:`. A bind for example, would look like `data-bind--disabled="scopename:statekey"`.
- [x] Constant attributes prefixes need to be configurable via the Elements.start method. Smae with seperators config.
- [x] Handles shouldnt be grabbed in the context of a store and instead globally. Based on state and scope used the store used should be determined.
- [x] Implement solution for plugins and registering handlers.
- [x] Change scoping to use `data-element="name"` instead of `data-scope="name"` to reduce boilerplate and force scoping. Is more explicit and easier to understand whats going on.
- [x] Instead of supporting !state for booleans, allow attribute bindings to set actions as well allowing you to do any conditionals you need within them.
- [] Update how attributes are read into attribute maps. Currently each store and the init handlers all handle this themselves. Instead, at a top level we should select all the valid attributes and then pass them to the store and handlers as required.
- [-] Create Events handler plugin. Needs destroy method updating.
- [] Create Intersection handler plugin.
- [] Create DOM handler plugin.
- [] Create Focus Trap handler plugin.
- [] Go through lib and add debug logs where appropriate.
- [] Update entire readme to be better structured and more in-depth.
- [] Add method for re-creating the stores - would be needed for Astro's full site view transitions.
- [] Create some examples of how to use the library and make use of the createSignal, createEffect and createMemo functions.
